---
title: "Rescuing the Municipal State"
excerpt: "The Local Contradictions of the American Rescue Plan"
classes: wide
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/arpa_teaser.png
  overlay_filter: 0.2
  teaser: /assets/images/arpa_teaser.png

sidebar:
  - title: "Article"
    text: "Being prepared for Submission to _New Left Review_" 
  - title: "Topics"
    text: "Municipal Finance, New Municipalism, State Theory, State Keynesianism, American Rescue Plan"
---

<h1>Abstract</h1>
<br>
In the wake of COVID-19, the American Rescue Plan Act allocated a historic 130.7 billion dollars to local governments, expanding the autonomy of the municipal state in an attempt to contain its associated social and economic crises on the level of the local. The use of these funds has produced deep structural shifts in prevailing regimes of urban governance, leaving a host of contradictions and a shifting terrain upon which class struggles over the municipal state can be fought in the future. It remains for social movements and city residents to capitalize on these structural transformations by seizing and democratizing the municipal state, using its increased fiscal autonomy and increased state capacity to push and further a leftist urban agenda. 

<h1>Introduction</h1>h1>
In the United States, COVID-19 ushered in a series of six bi-partisan stimulus packages providing $4.6 trillion dollars to address the polycrises the pandemic caused and exacerbated. These packages, the CARES Act and the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) chief among them, represented a historic intervention of the federal government injecting tax dollars back into the global economy to serve a number of conflicting and contradictory purposes, changing the preceding relationship between the federal government and the market, employers, workers, households, states, local governments, and other social forces. These stimulus packages provided tranches of funding with varying levels of concessions to different class actors to stem the crisis, stabilize the hegemony of capital, and address the general stagnation of the global economy preceding COVID-19. However, the scale of the pandemic, and the State’s response to it, created conditions under which the prevailing neoliberal consensus came under fire from both the right and the left, within and between classes, and directly through the new agenda of the State, with wide-ranging implications for international relations, efforts to mitigate climate catastrophe, and global industrial policy. The question remains, how and to what extent these stimulus packages, and their successor Bidenomics, presented possibilities for a true break with neoliberalism versus a continuation and reinforcement of its dominating logics, with answers to this question varying depending on the scale and practice under consideration.  
Much of the analysis charting the challenge these stimulus packages have posed to neoliberal governance has, rightfully, been centered on the functioning of the federal government in terms of the nation state and its management of the global economic order. However, these stimulus packages have also wrought structural transformations down the scale of governance on the local level, the scale at which neoliberal governance has been most directly and strategically confronted by the left with the goal of expanding democratic municipal autonomy via the Right to the City and New Municipalism movements. Compared to the other stimulus packages subsumed under COVID-19 relief, the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA), specifically through its provisions for State and Local Fiscal Recovery (SLFRF), stands out in how it has impacted the relationship between the federal government and the municipal state. The historic distribution of ARPA-SLFRF funds arrives in US Cities over a half century since the nadir of the 1960s great society initiatives — the last time cities were incorporated into the state-Keynesian federal system of redistribution armed with the funds to plan and set their own development. In the interim, the federal government has abandoned the municipal state to neoliberal austerity through federal retrenchment, disinvestment and privatization, forcing local governments to rely on dwindling local tax bases while making appeals to private capital for infrastructural investment and operations funding, shrinking its autonomy to act and set its own urban agenda. While the federal government has still made funding available to local governments, it has done so indirectly through a growing system of intermediaries (foundations, non-profits, NGO’s. public-private partnerships) restricted to specific use cases, limiting the municipal state’s ability to address its own needs unacknowledged by federal and philanthropic purviews. 

By providing a large influx of federal funding directly to local governments with limited restrictions on use, ARPA-SLFRF appears to have opened up a possible exception to the past four decades of neoliberal urban governance and federal-municipal state relations. In many ways, ARPA-SLFRF funds are responding directly to the limitations of neoliberal urbanism in being able to address collective needs on the local level brought into sharp relief by the crisis of the pandemic. Within the framework of the broader federal response to COVID-19, ARPA-SLFRF acts as the mechanism by which crisis relief is reaching households through the intermediary of the municipal state in the form of direct cash assistance and social service provision, their job being to identify and knit together neoliberalism’s local patchwork social welfare system by building state capacity and connecting its supports directly to households. This strategy for welfare provision to address the spread of COVID-19 and alleviate its accompanying social unrest (mass death, mass unemployment, lockdown protests, the George Floyd uprisings), has led some commentators to draw parallels to LBJ’s great society, heralding ARPA as the first step in building a Great Society 2.0 . With the death of Build Back Better, ARPA-SLFRF remains the largest investment in social welfare provision directed through local governments under the paradigm of Bidenomics, and is therefore illustrative of what actual post-neoliberal State approaches could look like under changed federal-municipal relations.

The question this article poses is to what extent has ARPA-SLFRF made contestation against, and continuity with, this existing state of affairs possible on the local level and what does it mean for leftist struggles against and through the municipal state moving forward? The answers to both of these questions lie in understanding how ARPA-SLFRF has impacted the autonomy of the municipal state both quantitatively and qualitatively – charting how it has structurally altered the state apparatus and, by doing so, made new openings and closures for the pursuit and use of state power by different class actors possible – to either further or contest the prevailing regime of neoliberal urban governance and its prevailing class conditions of municipal state dependency on capital and philanthropy. The analysis will proceed by asking the following questions. What was ARPA-SLFRF? What was the situation of the prevailing American Municipal State it was injected into? How has it both furthered and contested the prevailing state of affairs within the municipal state? What political terrain does ARPA-SLFRF leave in its wake that shapes what strategies should be pursued by the left moving forward? What is clear is that ARPA-SLFRF has produced deep structural shifts in prevailing regimes of urban governance, leaving a host of contradictions and a shifting terrain upon which class struggles over the municipal state can be fought in the future.
